/Grow Up and Blow Away/ was released by Metric as their third LP following two
successful release cycles, a film appearance, and a series of shows opening for
the Stones. Viewed in order between 2005's /Live it Out/ and 2009's
/Fantasies/, even the cover seems to stick out with its busy, crumbling brick
and hand-drawn ornamentation. The sound of the record is unique in the
discography as well, reflecting more of the band's EP sound than the energetic
rock of their first releases and the synth-focused direction they would
eventually take. And in some ways /Grow Up/ sounds like an Emily Haines solo
record with contributions to production and vocals by James Shaw.

That's because the 2007 release of /Grow Up/ was six years late. It was
recorded partially as a twosome and partially with three musicians instead of
Metric's eventual four. It was delayed by label troubles and label reticence
and was even released with significant tracklist changes. And unfortunately the
album is overlooked. On one hand this is understandable as many of the songs
simply wouldn't fit in a Metric live set. But on the other, /Grow Up/ features
a lot of variety in a 40-minute listen. It provides a lens to bring Metric's
sonic evolution into focus and imagine other paths the band could have taken.

The titular opening track begins with a sample of a child's voice, soon
followed by Metric's mandatory synths and Emily Haines's vocals. It is
immediately obvious that /Grow Up/ lacks the bigness of much of the band's
other work. The vocal melody swings a bit around a kind of hopeless "Gift of
the Magi"

#+begin_quote
If she weren't writing in blood

She'd bring him her jokes, a new liver

And a shovel for the mud

If he were not knee-deep in mud

He'd bring her his drugs

He'd get her a typewriter
#+end_quote

"Hardwire" is up next, and features Emily switching to a higher register over
piano chords and drums. While again the song never reaches the raw energy level
of much of /Old World/, Metric's ability to evolve the sound of a slightly
longer track is on full display. In the last minute and a half of "Hardwire",
James Shaw sings the bridge, brings in a couple of new synth riffs, and lets
Emily end the final choruses in something approaching a scream and a cry.

Paul Haines, Emily's father, was a jazz poet who collaborated with Carla Bley
on a few projects and also released some work on Kip Hanrahan's American Clav√©
label. The clearest influence on his daughter's work is the cover of the first
Soft Skeleton record, but in Metric proper's catalog "Rock Me Now" sticks
out. "Sing with me" is the interjection after the first spoken stanza, and Shaw
is the one who does most of the singing from then on. Emily's words paint a
picture of Las Vegas, a city which appears as a motif again in their body of
work.

"Like you, I love it when Jimmy sings." said Haines in 2015 during the run-up
to the /Pagans/ release. Fortunately, /Grow Up/ is an embarrassment of riches
in this regard. The chorus of "The Twist" is a duet, and the verses are
typically emotive writing from Emily.

But if the verses of "The Twist" are sufficiently emotive, "On the Sly" turns
the dial up to 11. The desperation captured here parallels that from /Art of
Doubt/'s "Love You Back". Meanwhile, several ideas that will be revisited later
on the album are introduced here. One of them, the dirty sugar factory, likely
refers to the Redpath refinery in Toronto, Ontario, which indeed produces a
smell for its waterfront locale.

"Soft Rock Star" appears in the tracklist twice, making the "Jimmy vs. Joe Mix"
the album closer. The two versions are not hugely different: Jimmy and Joe bump
the tempo by a hair and mix in some additional vocals. (I've not been able to
deduce "Joe"'s identity. Tidal simply credits the mononym.) In any case, the
lyrics here are some of the more pointedly political ones on the record, albeit
not coming close to /Old World/'s "ten-year-old enemy soldier" or "Invasion's
so succexy".

#+begin_quote
Schoolyard, junior high style

Bullies have always tried to buy the better girls

But failed until now
#+end_quote

Not only does "Raw Sugar" bring the sugar factory of only two songs ago back to
mind, it drops "on the sly" in the first line, presumably from another
perspective. The pace of the song suggests some kind of forward momentum, but
its contents lament the feeling of being stuck in a rented space, unable to
leave and play the tambourine for long enough. (I seem to remember an interview
where Jimmy mentioned Emily's love of the instrument, but couldnt't recover a
link for here. Please @ me if I'm off-base.)

"Lose friends to the airwaves and the airlines" ends the first verse of "White
Gold", perhaps referring to "On the Sly"'s old flame who made it big in the
world of airline DJs. But despite the bluest-sounding production on the record,
it manages to suggest a light at the end of the tunnel. Or at least the
capacity for hope against the odds.

#+begin_quote
But I'm gonna make it right

The future in my eyes, bright

...

Call me when you get

Better at your game

You haven't beat me yet
#+end_quote

"London Halflife" doesn't sound much like anything else in Metric's
discography. The closest parallel is probably another penultimate track,
/Synthetica/'s "Wanderlust" with its surprising Lou Reed feature. But the
surprise factor is the connection, not the sonic palette. While Reed's voice
sticks out as familiar on the later record, here the vocal track is mixed to
nearly blend with the fuzzy guitar and piano timbres.

At this point, Metric has released a lot of music, rightfully entered the
Canadian indie canon as a cohesive act and through side contributions, and
continues to refine their sound positively (/Art of Doubt/ both reminds of
/Pagans/ and surpasses it, imo). Twenty years ago, though, Haines and Shaw were
still building a band, deciding what to compose, and struggling to find a
release path for their work. And yet the LP produced then contains many of the
characteristic Metric traits: Emily Haines's poetic writing, Shaw's synthful
production, motifs of industrialization, Las Vegas, cynicism, but ultimate
hope.
